Objectives
- Describe cloud concepts
- Describe Azure architecture and services (Compute, Network and Storage)
- Describe Azure management and governance (Infra mgmt, Database, and software mgmt)

Structure of Course
Describe Cloud computing (25-305)
1. define cloud computing => It is someone else computer, Ability to rent computing resources on demand, windows/Linux servers, 
unlimited file storage, databases, message queues, content delivery network, batch processing jobs

Describe the shared responsibility model
1. Responsibilities between the customer and Microsoft are shared along with security
On-premises responsibility/Cloud VM responsibility

2. Define cloud models, including public/private/hybrid
public - computing services are provided by third-party providers and available on the Internet to everyone
private - computing services offered either over the internet or network to select users instead of the general public
hybrid - It is a computing environment that combines a private cloud with a public cloud

3. Compare cloud pricing models
Complexity/drawback (Unable to predict) - Cloud pricing can be complicated and is based on a few factors like Geographical region, Instance size, Bandwidth, Savings Plan,
OS SKU/License, DiskType/Size, Backup storage, support agreement, API choice, consumed storage

Benefits of using cloud services
1. Hight Availability - Ability to remain operational to users during planned or unplanned outages
2. Scalability - Ability of a system to accommodate increasing demand by adding or removing resources as needed. Vertical scaling is scaling up or down by adding resources to a single server.
Azure - 96 vCPUs/384 GB memory. Horizontal scaling is scaling in or out. It adds more servers to systems and has no limit to scaling. Adds cost as adding no. of servers to the system. 
3. Elasticity - Ability of a system to quickly and easily scale up or down the amount of resources that a system uses. Auto-scaling
4. Reliability - Ability of a system to perform its intended function without interruption and with a high degree of accuracy
5. Predictability - Ability to forecast and control the performance and behavior of a system. Includes the ability to predict system usage. 
Achieved by autoscaling, load balancing, different instance types/sizes/pricing tiers, cost management tools, API
6. Security - 
7. Governance - How your organization does business. Process of defining/implementing and monitoring a framework of policies that guides an organization's cloud operations. 
Ensures policies are followed in the cloud. Azure Policy and Blueprint
8. Manageability - Managing cloud resources and infra on the cloud. This can be achieved by CLI, PowerShell, REST, APIs, etc

Describe cloud service types
1. IaaS => Cloud providers only provide the infrastructure. Just computer, storage, and networking. Example, Virtual Machines, IaaS storage - Azure storage, IaaS Networking - VM
2. PaaS => Provides more than just the infrastructure. Includes a service layer on top of IaaS - computing, storage, and networking. Example - Azure App services, CI/CD, containers, Azure SQL Database
3. SaaS => Cloud apps - everything is managed and provided by infra so the user just needs to use those apps/services. For example, Tools such as Office 365, OneDrive, Skype

Serverless
1. Enables developers to build and run application code without provisioning or managing servers or backend infra. Serverless services: Functions, Container Apps, Kubernetes, SQL Database, Cosmos DB

Virtual Machines - 723 VM

Meta Data - Data related to another data

Architecture and services (35-40%)
1. Regions - Areas of the world where Azure has a set of data centers. One region connected to another is called "region pair". Region pairs have highest speed connections and
special treatment during Azure updates
2. Availability Zones and Data Centers - AZ are physically separate locations within each Azure region. (One or more data centre). 
Not every region supports Availability Zones, Not every service supports Availability Zones
Three types of AZ Services: Zonal Services, Zone-Redundant Services, Always Available Services
Zonal - You choose a specific Availability Zone to deploy the service
Zone-Redundant - Automatically deployed across zones
Always available services - Microsoft ensures they are always on. Also called 'Non-regional services'
3. Resources and Resource Groups - A resource is basically a service like a Virtual Machine, storage account, or database. A Resource Group is a logical grouping of resources
4. Subscriptions - It is basically a billing unit with Azure
5. Management Groups - Defining different policies for different resources and assigning policies and security

Compute and Networking services
1. Azure Compute services - VM, VM Scale Sets, App services(web apps), Azure Container Instances (ACI), Azure container apps and Azure Kubernetes Service(AKS) and Windows Virtual Desktop
Compute - Executing code in the cloud. 
VM(IaaS)
VM Scale Sets - 2 or more VM running the exact same code. Elasticity/autoscaling
App services(PaaS) - A new paradigm for running code in the cloud
Containers - Contains everything the app needs to run in a container image. ACI, Azure Container Apps(ACA) easy to use like a web service, Azure kubernetes services(AKS) runs on cluster
2. Azure Functions - Small pieces of code that you can run in the cloud
3. Networking services - VM, VPN gateway, VNet Peering and ExpressRoute
Virtual Network - emulating a physical network
Subnet - a subdivision of a virtual network that you control, that has its own security rules
Virtual Private Network (VPN) - connecting two networks as if they were on the same network, uses a network gateway
ExpressRoute - high-speed private connection to Azure
DNS services - domain name resolution
Load Balancer - distribute traffic evenly between multiple backend servers
Application Gateway - a higher-level of load balancer with an optional firewall
Content Delivery Network (CDN) - stores common static files on the edge, closer to the users for improved performance
Azure Front Door Service - a load balancer, CDN, and firewall all-in-one
4. Network Peering - Connection between 2 VM to establish an exchange between them
5. Public and private endpoints - 

STORAGE
1. Container(Blob) storage, Disk storage, File storage and storage tiers
Storage account - any data - cheapest
BLOB - binary large object - Collection of binary data. This binary data could be in the form of a file or data stored in a database
2. AZCOPY - AZCOPY is a command-line utility that you can use to copy blobs or files to or from a storage account. Useful for moving data between storage devices
Azure Blob Storage is a store for objects capable of storing large amounts of unstructured data. On the other hand, Azure File Storage is a distributed, cloud-based file system
3. File Sync - Enables centralizing your org file shares in Azure files, while keeping the flexibility, performance and compatibility of a windows file server
4. Migrate - helps an enterprise assess how its on-premises workloads will perform, and how much they will cost to host, in the Azure public cloud
5. Data Box - help you transfer large amounts of data to Azure more securely and perform edge compute. Physically shipping your data to Azure and having it show up in your account. It will be encrypted, wipped-clean after use

AZURE IDENTITY, ACCESS and SECURITY
1. Identity - It is a digital representation of a person, application or device
2. Active Directory - Identity management system used to identify users or entity
3. Benefits of Microsoft Entra ID (Active directory) - Reduced development time and easier support, Centralized administration 
4. Authentication - Authentication is a user proving who they are - user id and password
5. Authorization - performing action ex - providing authorization to create a new user etc
6. AD conditional access - Provides added security by allowing access to your applications across cloud and on-premises only from trusted and compliant devices
7. MFA or 2MFA - Requires 2 or more pieces of evidences to provide in order to login
8. Passwordless - Doesn't require series of word example - finger print, face scan
9. RBAC - Role-based access control - Create roles that represent the common tasks of the job
10. Zero-Trust Model of Security - Don't assume everything behind the firewall is safe. Verify explicitly, Use least privileged access and assume breach. Use every available method to validate identity
and authorization
11. Defence in Depth - Secures all 7 layers from physical to data. (OS layer)
Data - virtual network endpoint
Application - API management
Compute - limit Remote Desktop access, Windows Update
Network - NSG, use of subnets, deny by default
Perimeter - DDoS firewalls
Identity & access - Azure AD
Physical - Door locks and key cards

Resource tags - adding information to resources for helping with billing and support issues. For instance, VM can be created and used 





